C++
Compiled high performance language. C++ is a compiled programming language, which means that programmers use a program to compile their human-readable source code into machine-readable object and executable files. The program that performs this task is called a compiler.

In order to use classes and functions from the C++ Standard Library, the compiler must have access to a compiled version of the standard library, stored in object files. Most compiler implementations, including GCC, include those object files as part of the installation process. In order to use the Standard Library facilities, the compiler must "link" the standard library object files to the object files created from the programmer's source code.

Once the compiler links together the necessary object files, it is able to generate a standalone executable file that can run on the operating system.

Build Tools
Make and CMake are two separate and similar build tools that both serve to help simplify the process of building software.

In particular, build tools automate the process of compiling multiple source code files into object files, linking those object files together, and generating an executable. Build tools also often automate the process of determining which files have changed since the last build and thus need to be recompiled.



Make
GNU Make is a widely-used build tool that relies on Makefiles to automate the process of building a project.

A Makefile typically includes one or more "targets". Each target performs a different action.

build is a common target name that is configured in the Makefile to compile all of the project's source code into an executable file. clean, on the other hand, is a common target to delete all object files and other artifacts of the build process, resulting in a clean, unbuilt project state.

Running either make build or make clean (or any other target) on the command line would cause Make to search for a local Makefile, search for a matching target within that Makefile, and then execute the target.

CMake
CMake is a built tool that facilitates cross-platform builds, so that it is straightforward to build the same source code on Linux, macOS, Windows, or any other operating system. CMake relies on a CMakeLists.txt file, which configures appropriate cross-platform targets.



